hello my name is Christian rudder and I
was one of the founders of OkCupid it's
now one of the biggest dating sites in
the United States like almost everyone
at the site I was a math major and as
you might expect were known for the
analytic approach we have taken to love
we call it our matching algorithm
basically okay Cupid's matching
algorithm helps us decide whether two
people should go on a date
we built our entire business around it
now algorithm is a fancy word and people
like to drop it like it's this big thing
but really an algorithm is just a
systematic step-by-step way to solve a
problem and it doesn't have to be fancy
at all here in this lesson I'm going to
explain how we arrived at our particular
algorithm so you can see how it's done
now why are algorithms even important
why does this lesson even exist well
notice one very significant phrase I
used above they are step by step way to
solve a problem and as you probably know
computers excel at step-by-step
processes a computer without an
algorithm is basically an expensive
paperweight and since computers are such
a pervasive part of everyday life
algorithms are everywhere the math
behind OkCupid is matching algorithm is
surprisingly simple it's just some
addition multiplication a little bit of
square roots
the tricky part in designing it though
was figuring out how to take something
mysterious human attraction and break it
into components that a computer can work
with well the first thing we needed to
match people up was data something for
the algorithm to work with the best way
to get data quickly from people is to
just ask for it so we decided that
OkCupid should ask users questions stuff
like do you want to have kids one day
how often you brush your teeth do you
like scary movies and big stuff like do
you believe in God now a lot of the
questions are good for matching like
with like that is when both people
answer the same way for example two
people who are both into scary movies
are probably a better match than one
person who is and one person who isn't
but what about a question like do you
like to be the center of attention if
both people in a relationship are saying
yes to this then they're going to have
massive problems we realize this early
on and so we decided we needed a bit
more data from each question we had to
ask people to specify not only their own
answer but the answer they wanted from
someone
that worked really well but we needed
one more dimension some questions tell
you more about a person than others for
example a question about politics
something like which is worse book
burning or flag-burning
might reveal more about someone than
their taste in movies and it doesn't
make sense to weigh all things equally
so we added one final data point for
everything that OkCupid asks you you
have a chance to tell us the role it
plays in your life this ranges from
irrelevant to mandatory so now for every
question we have three things for our
algorithm first your answer second how
you want someone else your potential
match to answer and three how important
the question is to you at all with all
this information
OkCupid can figure out how well two
people will get along the algorithm
crunches the numbers and gives us the
result as a practical example let's look
at how we'd match you with another
person let's call him be your match
percentage with B is based on questions
you've both answered let's call that set
of common questions s as a very simple
example we use a small set s with just
two questions in common and compete a
match from that here are two example
questions the first one let's say is how
messy are you and the answer
possibilities are very messy average and
very organized and let's say you
answered very organized and you'd like
someone else to answer very organized
and the question is very important to
you basically you're a neat freak you're
neat you want someone else to be neat
and that's it and let's say B was a
little bit different he answered very
organized for himself but average is
okay with him as an answer from someone
else and the question is only a little
important to him let's look at the
second question it's the one from our
previous example do you like to be the
center of attention
the answers are just yes and no now
you've answered no how you want someone
else to answer is no and the question is
only a little important to you now B
he's answered yes he wants someone else
to answer no because he wants the
spotlight on him and the question is
someone important to him so let's try to
compute all this our first step is since
we use computers to do this we need to
assign numerical values to ideas like
someone important and very important
because computers need everything in
numbers we at OkCupid decided on the
following scale a relevant is worth zero
a little important is worth one somewhat
important is worth 10 very important is
50 and absolutely mandatory is 250 next
the algorithm makes two simple
calculations the first is how much did
B's answer satisfy you that is how many
possible points did B score on your
scale well
you indicated that B's answer to the
first question about messiness was very
important to you it's worth 50 points
and B got that right the second question
is worth only 1 because you said it was
only a little important and B got that
wrong so B's answers were 50 out of 51
possible points that's 98% satisfactory
it's pretty good and the second question
the algorithm looks at is how much did
you satisfy B well B placed one point on
your answer to the messiness question in
10 on your answer to the second of those
11 that's one plus ten you earned 10 you
guys satisfied each other on the second
question so your answers were 10 out of
11 equals 91% satisfactory to B that's
not bad the final step is to take these
two matched percentages and get one
number for the both of you to do this
the algorithm multiplies your scores
then takes the nth root where n is the
number of questions because s which is
the number of questions in this sample
is only two we have match percentage
equals the square root of 98 percent
times 91 percent that equals 94 percent
that 94 percent is your match percentage
with B it's a mathematical expression of
how happy you'd be with each other based
on what we know now why does the
algorithm multiply as opposed to say
average the to match scores together and
do the square root business in general
this formula is called the geometric
mean which is a great way to combine
values that have wide ranges and
represent very different properties in
other words it's perfect for romantic
matching you've got wide ranges and
you've got tons of different data points
like I said about movies about politics
about religion about everything
intuitively - this makes sense to people
satisfying each other 50 percent should
be a better match than to others who
satisfy 0 and 100 because affection
needs to be mutual after adding a little
correction for margin of error in the
case where we have a very small number
of questions like we do in this example
we're good to go
and
OkCupid matches two people it goes
through the steps we just outlined first
it collects data about your answers then
it compares your choices and preferences
to other peoples and simple mathematical
ways this the ability to take real-world
phenomena and make them something a
microchip can understand is I think the
most important skill anyone can have
these days like you use sentences to
tell a story to a person you use
algorithms to tell a story to a computer
if you learn the language you can go out
and tell your stories I hope this will
help you do that
you